Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Steven Holland. He's the
Gertrude Conway Vanderbilt Professor of Psychology at Vanderbilt University,
and today we're going to talk about depression, particularly
from an evolutionary perspective. So Doctor Holland, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone. Thank you very much.
So let's start perhaps with exploring what depression really
is because I mean, I wouldn't be surprised that
even though we hear, we nowadays hear a lot
about depression and other kinds of mental illness on
the news. I mean, maybe many people out there
are not really, don't really know exactly what we're
talking about. So what is depression?
Yes, certainly, uh, depression, um. IS a uh uh
conventionally considered a psychiatric disorder, and it's on a
continuum ranging from normal sadness, you know, bad moods
that everybody gets into, up to full-blown, very serious,
uh, psychotic, uh, uh, uh, depressions that uh often
will require hospitalization. Most folks will not, uh, have
anything near that severe. Uh, BUT it is, uh,
what, uh, the primary major diagnostic category, which is
called, uh, major depressive disorder, is the single most
common prevalent psychiatric disorder. And that, uh, you get
about, uh, conventional wisdom says about, uh, maybe about
15% of all people are going to have one
or more episodes in their lifetime, about twice as
many women as men.
Uh, AND by the way, since you mentioned that,
do we know at all why women are twice
as much as men to suffer from depression?
Uh, NO, we don't. Um, WE, we, we don't
know that. We know it's true. Uh, AND by
the way, I'll be talking primarily about unipolar depression,
which are those individuals that get depressed but never
have a manic or hypomanic episode. Uh, THERE'S a
very small percentage of people, about, uh, 1% of
the population. Uh, IF you talk about, uh, uh,
bipolar 1 or 2% of the population that have
a really severe manic episode that usually requires institutionalization,
uh, but that's, uh, the depressions in bipolar disorder
are very similar to, to the depressions in unipolar
disorder, but almost identical symptomatically. But bipolar disorder is
highly heritable, about as heritable as the schizophrenia. Uh,
IT'S, uh, far less prevalent, about 1 to 21
to 4% of the population can include the minor,
the less severe bipolar 2. Uh, DISORDERS, and it
is not, uh, uh, distributed unequally between the sexes.
So there, uh, there are these tantalizing clues that
something different is going on, uh, but again, we
don't know exactly why that is.
And to what extent is depression genetic? Does it
have a genetic component to it?
Uh, WELL, yeah, almost everything, uh, in, in human,
uh, uh, functioning has some kind of genetic component,
but it's not big in unipolar depression. It's about,
uh, uh, 0.3 to 0.0.4, which I think in
terms about 3 or 4% of the, 40% of
the causal variants. Quite different from bipolar disorder where,
which is, uh, goes about 0.7 to 0.8. So
it's, it's far less heritable. And again, we don't,
we don't fully understand that. If I circle back
around to the why women are more likely to
get depressed, uh, the, the other thing that, uh,
stands out is that the, Incidence of depression takes
off in early adolescence. It, it doesn't happen that
often in childhood. If it, if it does, there's
usually something situational, usually resolves and the situation resolves,
uh, but starting from early adolescence on 1112, 13,
uh, the incidence of depression goes up 2 to
3 times and twice as often, 2 to 3
times more often in women than in men because
of when it. Starts in early adolescence. A lot
of thought goes, maybe it has something to do
with hormonal variation, the onset of menses. Uh, THAT'S
also the time when, uh, uh, uh, males get
the growth spurt and a little later and women
don't. Uh, SO up until, uh, uh, elementary school,
women generally do as well as men do in
various kinds of pursuits and starting from adolescence on,
um. They, uh, uh, they, they tend to get
a, a drop in self-esteem and, uh, concern, interest
in things like stem cells. So how much of
that is biological, how much of that is cultural,
uh, we don't know. Mhm.
And what are then the criteria to diagnose depression?
Yeah, um, you can find, uh, descriptions of depression
that look very much like what we have now
in our current, uh, nosologies, uh, back in in
hieroglyphics on the walls of the pyramids. So it's
been around a very long time. Uh. Criteria get
get revised from time to time, but the general
current criteria, and they're very similar to what we've
been using for years, uh, you want to see
it, uh, you don't want to see it, but
you look for evidence of, uh, distress, uh, sadness,
distress, etc. AND or anhedonia, which is an almost
pervasive loss of interest. You need one of those
two to get the diagnosis, and then there are
usually about a half dozen other things that people
look for. For a loss of interest, loss of
motivation to do things. Uh, PEOPLE that used to
love to play tennis stopped playing tennis. Uh, YOU
get, uh, uh, oftentimes disruption in, uh, a couple
of biological functions. Sleep becomes disturbed. Uh, FOR some
people, it's having trouble falling asleep. For others, the
classic pattern is waking up early in the morning,
34 in the morning, ruminating like crazy, and not
being able to go back to sleep. It really
tracks the, uh, uh, cortis. LEVELS, the, uh, for
most people, the cortisol levels pick up around dawn.
For somebody who's clinically depressed with melancholic depression, it,
it starts a couple of hours earlier. Uh, LOSS
of interest in food, in most instances for some
people, uh, uh, there's a subtype called atypical depression.
For some people, it's, it's almost like a case
of the munchies. It's almost like they've been smoking
marijuana. They snack and oftentimes a preference for carbohydrates
and chocolate in particular. Um, LET'S see, we got,
uh, food, uh, and a loss of interest in
sex, uh, usually as well, those three kind of
classic biologic things. Uh. Self-concept takes a, takes a
plunge. Uh, PEOPLE don't think they can do things,
uh, so they don't try. So there's a whole
cluster of things, but it's usually the pervasive sadness
or the loss of interest or both, uh, that
defining the, the, uh, criteria.
And how long do people need to experience those
kinds of symptoms before they get a diagnosis?
Yeah, that's, that's relatively arbitrary. The formal criterion, look
for at least 2 weeks of, uh, that you
meet criterion for, uh, uh, one or the other
of those 2 key cardinal criterions, and then at
least 4 or 5 of the others. I forget
exactly how they set it up. It's kind of
like a Chinese menu, menu in a Chinese restaurant.
Uh, BUT they look for at least 2 weeks.
Uh, MOST folks, uh, in their first episode don't
pursue treatment unless it lasts long enough to become
chronic. Um, BUT, uh, gee, the, uh, the, the
work that I've done typically in outpatient psychiatric populations,
uh, people might have been depressed for a couple
of months, uh, or more, and usually in a
2nd or 3rd or subsequent episode before they think
to seek, seek treatment. That may be changing now
cause so much of the treatment nowadays is being
done by primary care physicians. We have, uh, uh,
some of the newer antidepressant medications, the Celexa. SEROTONIN
reuptake inhibitors like Prozac and others are relatively safe
and relatively effective. And because they're relatively safe, primary
care physicians feel comfortable prescribing them. The older antidepressants
that might work just a little better, uh, a
little more problematic in terms of risk of, uh,
of overdose and suicide or, or food, uh, uh,
uh, things with food or over the counter medications
that can produce complications, uh. Primary care physicians in
the old days, nowadays wouldn't prescribed them, but SSRI's
they're, they're comfortable prescribing. So there's been a real,
uh, #1, increase in the number of people are
getting treated, and 2, it's being half or more
at the level of primary care.
Is it possible that that at least in some
types of depression, people can get over the depressive
period or phase without any medical help?
Yeah, depression is relatively unique. It's temporal and not
situational. You think of people with phobias. They have
to be in the situation where the thing is
that they're afraid of for it to be a
problem for them. In depression, it's temporal. When you
get depressed, you get depressed most anywhere, most all
of the time, but, uh, Unlike phobias, it goes
away in time. We have, it's a phenomenon called
spontaneous remission, and most people, particularly in our ancestral
past, most people are going to get over depressions
without any kind of treatment interventions. It may be
several months, it might even be in a small
number of cases, uh, several years, but almost all
episodes of depression resolve spontaneously, and again, we don't
know why.
Mhm. Yes, but, but still on that point, I
mean, because, because of course we hear also now
the, nowadays with the internet and social media, unfortunately,
lots of misinformation very easily spread online and sometimes
we hear things that are really not. Helpful and
even might be harmful. I mean, does depression have
anything to do at all with willpower? I mean,
can people get over depression just because they want
to, or?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, um. That is, it doesn't
mean that you can't do things and learn to
do things that get you out of a depression
or keep them from coming back in the future.
You can, but it's not a lack of willpower.
Depression saps motivation. So almost the cardinal feature, it's,
it, it makes it difficult for you to do
the things you typically do, the things you typically
enjoy, uh, and it's, it's almost the cardinal feature
of the disorder. So I, I, you don't want
to, uh, you don't want to hold anybody responsible
for having difficulty getting things accomplished when they get
depressed. Right. Like expecting somebody who has a bad
case of the flu to get out of bed
and then go back to business, they can, but
it takes a huge amount of willpower to do
it. It's not a lack of lack of willpower
that causes it,
right? And, uh, of course, I'm going to ask
you just in a bit, uh, how you approach
depression from an evolutionary perspective, but how has depression
been traditionally approached in psychology?
Yeah, um. Not, not typically all that well, uh,
for in terms of psychological interventions, uh, most everything
dates back to, uh, uh, Freud and, uh, some
of the psychoanalytic psychodynamic, uh, therapies he developed, uh,
might well work for other things. They're not particularly
useful in the, in the treatment of depression. Um,
AND it wasn't until the, uh, about the 1950s
with the advent of the, uh, uh, antidepressant medications,
most of them discovered accidentally that people were looking,
uh, physicians looking for. Uh, MEDICATIONS or treat other
things, but they noticed, uh, uh, almost by serendipity
that it resolved depression. For example, some of the
early trials, uh, uh, with the, uh, I think
it was the, uh, uh, monoamine oxidase inhibitors were
designed to see if they could relieve, uh, the
buildup of fluid or tuberculosis. It didn't have, didn't
help tuberculosis at all, but it helped the depression
for people that are then locked away in, in
asylums. Uh, SO we, we stumbled on medications that
worked in the. Reducing uh uh symptoms of depression
in the 50s, uh, by about the 1980s, 19,
and they were, they were generally reasonably effective, but
again, a tricyclic, one of the older standbys, uh
you can overdose on two weeks of that. It's,
it's like sending somebody who's suicidal home with a
loaded gun, uh and the MAO and MAOI, MAO
inhibitors, uh, um, you can, you, you, you can
overdose with, uh, uh. What, what, not, not all
the medi medication stuff so much, but the combinations
with certain kinds of foodstuffs like soy sauce could
put you in a hypertensive crisis. So, uh people
other than uh psychiatrists were reluctant to prescribe. Nowadays
with the SSRI's that came in in the uh
late 80s, early 90s, the uh uh a lot
of the treatment is, is passed over to primary
care physicians.
Mhm. And so, uh, what does an evolutionary approach
to depression bring to the table in terms of
approaching it theoretically to under to understand better perhaps
what it is and then I don't know if
it has some also clinical applications we might talk
about that,
right, it, it might have down the line, uh,
let me say first, this is a very, very
much a, a, a minority view. This is not
something widely accepted in the field that would be
considered quite controversial. Um, TO, however, that's within psychiatry
or psychology, to an evolutionary biologist, uh, negative aspects
like sadness, anger, anxiety, etc. uh, AREN'T disorders or
diseases, those evolved adaptations that kept our ancestors alive
in the past long enough to become our ancestors.
They evolved because they served to function and what
the, to an evolution of biologist, what that meant.
As they kept, uh, they facilitated, uh, passing your
genes on to subsequent generations, either yours or, or
your, uh, uh, biological relatives. Uh, ONE of the
biggest changes in evolutionary theory in the 20th century,
uh, was moving beyond, uh, the notion of survival
of the fittest to survival of the fittest gene
line. And anything that you do that facilitates either
you passing. Genes on or your biological relatives, uh,
is going to be selected evolutionarily. It's going to
give you a competitive advantage with other members of
the species. The, uh, what, what passes for humor
among, uh, evolutionary biologists, uh, fellow, I think, uh,
Haldane once said, I wouldn't give my life for
one brother, but I would for two brothers or
8 cousins because genetically, that's the break-even point. And,
uh, And also, by the way, I don't want
to uh uh sidetrack because all, by the way,
might account for why suicide is probably baked into
the species. Virtually any of us would sacrifice ourselves
for children or grandchildren because they're younger, they're more
likely to produce the gene line, and evolution is
a cruel mistress. It selects winners and losers, and
anything that works better is what then gets codified
in the gene line and it's can be built
in. Um, MANY people who become suicidal, not most
people don't become suicidal mercifully, but many people who
do get very concerned with being a burden on
family, other kinds of members, or not having anything
much to contribute, and, uh, it's, it's, it's always
a tragedy. But for example, if you're a, uh,
uh, First Nations, uh, uh. And what they used
to call Inuits, Eskimos north of the Arctic Circle,
100 years ago, if it's a particularly harsh winter,
it is not considered suicide for the grandparents to
walk out in the snow and not come back,
so the grandchildren have enough food to get the,
the wintertime. It's, it's, it's something that's probably baked
into our, uh, our psychological lives. Um, ALL of
that being said, uh, the question then is if
indeed it were an evolved adaptation, what function did
it evolve to serve and. Excuse me. And for
there, again, an evolutionary biologist, which I'm not, but
I've been, uh, uh, hanging around with, uh, some,
or at least one, what they would do is
follow the energy. It's much like the investigative reporters
in Watergate follow the money. The evolutionary biologists follow
the energy, and when somebody gets depressed, um, the
energy goes to the cortex. If you are Or,
uh, uh, have an infection, the energy goes to
the immune system. If you're starving, the energy goes
to, uh, maintain the vital organs, the brain, the
heart, etc. Neither send much energy to the cortex.
If you get clinically depressed, the energy goes to
the cortex, among other, uh, regions of the limbic
and, uh, uh, the brain and, uh, limbic system
and the, and the, uh, uh, limbic system as
well. And basically, it makes you ruminate. And if
depression makes you ruminate, uh, clinicians give rumination a
bad name. They consider it something that's kind of
working, endless, going over and over things, not getting
anywhere. A regular non-medical dictionary, rumination just means thinking
long and hard about a complex problem. And uh
when you get depressed, energy gets uh uh directed
to the cortex. It keeps you focused on the
problem that you're trying to solve. It activates short-term
memory, which is very energetically expensive, so that you
can really think about things and hold it in,
and uh you can make a pretty good case,
I think, uh, for the brain being charged to
spend its time trying to sort out what the
problem was that was distressing you in the first
place.
OK, but since we're tackling things from an evolutionary
perspective here, are there any specific problems that are
re evolutionarily relevant, uh, that would trigger, uh, depression
or a depressive state then this
gets, uh, this becomes quite speculative. However, if we
take a look at when depression really takes off
in its incidence, that's early adolescence, uh, when, I
mean, and when it takes off, particularly. Women relative
to men, it, it increases in both gender and
in both sexes, but especially women. Uh, THAT'S the
time, uh, when you go, becomes, uh, reproductively active
and in our, uh, evolutionary past, that would be
the time that young primates, uh, could start to
reproduce. That would be a time when young women,
uh, female primates would be bothered by male primates.
Males are bigger, stronger, uh, physically more aggressive when
it comes to sex, and, uh, if you get
ostracized from the troop. Um, YOU'RE going to die.
You're either going to be picked off by predators
or you're going to starve, so you have to
stay in good graces with the, uh, uh, the,
uh, social networks in the troop, and Males and
females generally have somewhat separate uh social networks, so
it means you've got to keep the grandmothers paying
attention to your infants to get driven out, uh,
uh, you're gonna, you're gonna starve or get picked
off, and the evolutionary cost if you're a young
female is twice as great as it is for
males because you're losing both you and The infant,
as opposed to just using the uh losing the
male. For males, it's probably more tied up in
uh uh dominance hierarchy and whether or not you're
going to get a chance to uh to reproduce.
Now, we don't know that for sure, uh, but
it would match up very nicely with the time
course.
Right. But then, uh, I mean, of course, as
you said, this is a minority view, but, uh,
since we are exploring it, um, if it is
correct and if depression is an adaptation, is it
still a disease?
No, no, no. Uh, FROM an evolutionary perspective and
even uh within psychiatry, it's moving in that direction.
It's not quite there yet. The notion is that
a disease is when an adaptation breaks down. Not
when a normal uh when amputation functions the way
it was designed to function. For example, the uh
uh a very small number of people are born
with the hearts on the right side of their
body. That's aberrant. That's not the way the, uh,
body's designed, but it doesn't do anything to them
or their uh uh life expectancy or the capacity
to uh uh pass on their gene line. If
your aorta uh ruptures, uh, you're gonna die very
rapidly. That is a disease, the, a, a, uh,
evolutionary plan, uh, that was structured, uh, uh, to
keep you alive broke down, that would be considered
a disease, but heart on the other side of
the body, not a disease.
OK, so, but do you think that perhaps there,
there would be some sort of evolutionary mismatch in
the sense that maybe the kinds of societies, traditional
society, societies we evolved in. Um, THERE would be,
uh, space or it would be functional for people
to go through a period of depression, uh, with
the goal of solving those problems they would have
to deal with that are relevant from an evolutionary
perspective, but now that we live, or at least
people who live in industrialized or post-industrial societies. I
mean, they don't have enough time to deal with
depression because they have to go work the next
day or
yeah, yeah, it, it, it, it could be and
there may well be changes, uh, at the same
time, uh, you can take the, uh, I say,
you can take the person out of New York
and take New York out of the New Yorker.
Uh, DEPRESSION across culturally shows up in virtually every
culture in, in very similar kinds of ways, very
similar kinds of, uh, Uh, uh, prevalences and incidence
rates, uh, usually takes off in adolescence regardless of
the culture. In, uh, Asian cultures, people describe it
more in terms of, uh, fatigue and physical symptomatology
rather than sadness, but all the other symptoms are
there and they and it responds every bit as
well. Uh, I look at the, uh, I look
at the COVID, uh, uh, crisis, and when, uh,
young adolescents couldn't go to school, they were spending
more time on the internet, more time interacting with
people. And we had increased incidence in, uh, uh,
at least, uh, what appeared to be, uh, depressive
episodes in, uh, teenagers, particularly teenage girls, because they
were living and dying by whether or not they
got liked by their friends and where things stand.
So it's, uh, if there are things that are
wired into the species, they're going to sometimes be
aggravated by certain conditions, but by and large, the,
uh, phenomenon we see in, in depression, both unipolar
and much less common bipolar, seem to be relatively
cross-cultural and cross-situational.
Mhm. Yeah, but, but I, I mean, perhaps the
question I wanted to ask there was more, uh,
so perhaps in more modern industrialized or post-industrial societies
because, uh, the pace of life is, uh, faster.
I mean, do, do you think that, do you
think that perhaps it would make sense to, uh,
treat, uh, depression or deal with depression as a
Disorder or a disease because it is not, it
is probably not a very um a behavior that
is very well adapted to the
sense of society. It, it may well not be
functional in current uh in current kinds of societies
and again that may, uh, that would hold uh
across uh, across genders. Uh, PARENT that can't get
out of bed to, uh, make breakfast for the
kids, that's not functional. And uh an individual goes
on to work or doesn't go into work because
they're too sad, too depressed, uh, that again, that's
not functional. I wouldn't say that depression uh doesn't
interfere with function, it clearly does, just that it's
not a disease. It's a, uh, it's an adaptation
that, uh, perhaps to biological, uh, a biologist, it's
an adaptation that evolved to serve a purpose. Whether
or not that purpose is still useful in current
days, is a real question, and that's fair.
OK. So let's go back then to the um
the more medical aspect of depression, the psychological aspect
of it, uh uh from a clinical psychology perspective,
of course. I mean, among people who suffer from
depression, what percentage of them experience recurrent depression?
Um, CONVENTIONAL wisdom is maybe about 70, 80% of
them. Uh, WHEN I gave you that guesstimate earlier
about, uh, uh, that estimate of about 15, 16%
of the population, twice as many women as, as
men are gonna have one or more episodes of
major depression. At some point in their lifetime, uh,
the other part of the conventional wisdom and all
of this based on retrospective epidemiological surveys was that
about 70% to 80% of them are going to
have more than one episode. It's going to be
recurrent phenomena, and that's what conventional wisdom would hold.
Um, IT turns out that if the way you
get that kind of estimate is by interviewing people,
maybe a whole range from adolescents on through, uh,
uh, senescent, uh, people who are older forget earlier
episodes. So it looks like, uh, younger people have.
More episodes than older people and it looks like
um the, the estimates are lower than what you
get if you take a sample and follow them
from birth on. Uh, THERE'S been a marvelous study,
the Dunedin study that uh uh Tammy Moff and
Ashley Caspi been following where people were picked up
at birth in, uh, uh, New Zealand city. Uh,
AND Dunedin and then followed every couple of years
they get interviewed. They've been tracking the course. The
sample now is up in their 40s, and the
rates of depression in that sample are 3 to
5 times higher than what the retrospective epidemiological surveys
would suggest. I have a good friend, colleague Ron
Kessler, who's probably the best of the epidemiologists who
conducted the retrospective surveys. I remember, uh, asking him
one time, what do you think about it? He
said, well, of course, they, uh, they don't miss
episodes. We miss episodes because people don't remember. So
it's understood among epidemiologists, that's a better way to
estimate and estimate your estimates. And when you do
that, uh, it's probably the case that anybody could
get a unipolar depression if something bad enough happens
to them. And indeed, uh, most of us would
have a grief reaction if we lose somebody that
we love dearly or a child. Uh, THAT'S virtually
universal, um. Um, AND that's probably because the capacity
to experience what would be severe enough to be
labeled a clinical depression, uh, uh, is stamped into
the, wired into the species. It could happen to
virtually any of us.
And what is difficult to treat depression? I mean,
why is it that some people, I mean, apparently
never get over depression and even though they go
through several different kinds of treatment. INCLUDING psychotherapy and
medication, they seem to be resistant to everything.
Yeah, yeah, I, I don't think people know, uh,
we're making great strides in the underlying biology, underlying
psychological aspects. Uh, SOME things stand out as kind
of quasi. Uh, RISK factors, the earlier the onset,
the heavier the genetic load, uh, incidents of, uh,
trauma, in pre-adolescence, particularly sexual abuse or emotional neglect
and trauma, seem to be contributors, but we don't
actually know for sure. And the one thing, uh,
uh, That I, I would be, uh, not wild
about the term, uh, treatment resistant. Uh, NO patient
ever fails treatment. Treatments fail patients, and what that
would mean is for an unfortunate smaller subset of
the population, we don't know yet. We don't have
tools at our disposal yet that can help lift
them out of depression. Uh, THE wonder drug that
people are, uh, really very excited about, uh, relatively,
I'd say somewhat newer, is ketamine. Uh, WHICH, uh,
uh, can, can get somebody who's, uh, seriously chronically
depressed out of a depression within a matter of
hours. The problem is, uh, if you take it
too often, uh, uh, too, uh, repeatedly, it can,
uh, drive a, uh, psychosis, and, uh, it, the
effects generally fail, uh. Wash away pretty rapidly, but
they're, we're hoping to move in the direction of
being able to figure out exactly how to use
that. It is, uh, it's more the, uh, MD
MDA and MDA receptors, which is more glutenmatergic, which
means it's downstream from the things that drive you
to ruminate, uh, in the first place. So there
may be something special there. We just haven't figured
out how to use it yet.
Mhm. And what are the main treatments available for
depression? So someone gets diagnosed with it, uh, I
mean, what is available to
them? Yeah, got you. Uh, THERE are a couple
of different things, and then I, one of the
better aspects of depression, it's eminently treatable. Not only
does it tend to go away on its own
for most people, uh, but it's eminently treatable, uh.
Let me start first with bipolar disorder. From bipolar
disorder to bipolar 1, where a person has a
truly psychotic level of manic or occasionally uh depressive
episodes, you want to be on medications. You want
to be on lithium and or a mood stabilizer.
Uh, THERE'S nothing that we have psychologically. That offsets
the onset of the next manic episode the way
that lithium does. It's, it's a true wonder drug,
but that's 1% of the population. If you have
bipolar depression, which means you have, uh, you'll have
occasional serious episodes of depression, but, uh, only hypomanic
episodes, it just means more energy, uh. More, a
little bit of grandiosity, but nothing that goes too
far. Um, I'd, if I could sign up for
that, I would, and actually I didn't have to.
I'd probably have that. I'd probably be criterion, and
I think that probably helps me write, do things,
etc. AND, uh, a couple of, uh, uh pleasant
episodes of depression back in my early twenties, but
nothing since, so it You know, it's, uh, that
people with with bipolar 2, particularly if it's only
kind of chronically hypomanic tend to be overrepresented as,
uh, heads of Fortune 500 companies, etc. It's, it
might actually be a, be adapt adapted to have
that extra, uh, drive, energy, etc. uh, FOR Unipolar
depression, uh, you can treat it as reasonably with
psycho, uh, non-psychotic unipolar depression is treated as reasonably
as effective with psychological interventions as it is with
medications. And the, uh, uh, the medications starting with
the older MAOIs, the tricyclics, and now much more
recently, the, uh, the SSRI's, uh, are generally effective
for most people. They were generally, uh, reduce the,
uh, uh, the symptoms of depression. Uh, PSYCHOTHERAPIES can
do as as well readily those that are empirically
supported. Uh, COGNITIVE, uh, therapy is the, uh, approach
that I've been, I was trained in and, and
stick closest to. Uh, NOT only seems to be
as effective as medications on average, but has an
enduring effect that medications don't have. If you stop
taking, uh, uh, medications, oftentimes depression will come back
and cognitive therapy, it's, uh, you, you cut risk
for subsequent symptom return by about 50%. Interpersonal psychotherapy,
uh, which Which is a very different approach to
therapy. It's, it kind of grew out of psychodynamic
approaches where they dropped uh attention to childhood events
and they don't worry about creating a transference neurosis.
It basically talk about relationships. Also seems to be
quite effective, as effective as medications, as effective as
cognitive therapy. Um, MORE purely behavioral interventions like behavioral
activation also seem to be. Uh, uh, QUITE effective
as, uh, not as intensively studied, it's often studied,
but they seem to be about as effective as
medications and may well have an enduring effect as
well. They lend themselves particularly to shorter term, maybe
digital kinds of interventions that you might do in,
in global mental health, and, uh, so it's, it,
it doesn't take quite as long there. Uh. By
and large, uh, you kind of pick them and
choose them. You get what you want, although in
this country, what you typically get is the, uh,
uh, whatever the person on the other side of
the door that you go through offers. And if
most of the treatments now being done in primary
care, it used to be about 2/3 of the
folks that were clinically depressed and got treated for
it, got treated with psychotherapy. Nowadays, it's 2/3, maybe
even more so get treated with medications. Most of
those folks in, in primary care, not by psychiatrists.
Mhm. Uh, AND in focusing now on psychotherapy, I
think that earlier you mentioned that, uh, approaches that
are related to psychoanalysis, psychodynamic approaches do not seem
to be very effective against depression, but I mean
more broadly, what kinds of Of psychotherapeutic approaches.
Yeah, yeah, uh, let me just say that, uh,
a quick word that I interpersonal psychotherapy, uh, where
they have a number of things that help you
focus on the relationship that's not that structured, it's
not, uh, they wouldn't do things like homework, etc.
BUT it again seems to be quite effective. It's
not. Quite as uh easy to find outside of
the uh major cities, but it's, uh, it, it,
it seems to suggest that you don't have to
attend to, uh, cognitions or behaviors to get somebody
over depression. This works quite well as well, although
we don't know whether or not it has an
enduring effect. For cognitive behavior therapies, that's the, uh,
the area that I'm most, uh, uh, done most
of my work in, and in particular, uh, one
version of the cognitive therapy. The original notion was
that people get depressed because they come to believe
unduly negative things about themselves, and they engage in,
in, in biased information processing. From an evolutionary perspective,
that's probably not the case. Uh, IT doesn't mean
that. They don't believe things that aren't necessarily true,
uh, but, um, if you induce sadness in somebody
who's not depressed, they'll start, for example, with a
social exclusion task, they'll start ruminating about what did
they do wrong, and they'll, they'll end up producing
things that, that not only feel sad, but they
start producing the kinds of beliefs that somebody, uh,
would come into therapy for uh clinical depression with.
Uh, WHAT I've swung around to starting to think
now is what we do in cognitive therapy is
we help people ruminate more efficiently. Everyone, uh, some
folks get stuck, uh, believing things, particularly, uh, things
that are global, stable, and internal. Either I'm unlovable
or I'm incompetent. Usually depression involves either love or
work, score one for Freud, and what we help
people do is to examine the accuracy of those
beliefs, often running experiments to find out. Let's give
you two examples. I had a client. Uh, YEARS
ago, who had a sculptor, an artist who'd lost
his job, probably no fault of his own in
a small liberal arts college, uh, he came in
convinced that what he had was a reality-based depression
because he was out of work. He wasn't out
of work, he was working as a handyman on
a condominium complex, but he thought that was well
beneath his level of training. What he hadn't done
is apply for another job in academia since he
lost his first job. And the reason was every
time he started thinking about doing it, he got
overwhelmed by the magnitude of the task, didn't think
he was up to it, so he didn't start,
and it was a relatively simple matter to get
him to take a big task, break it down
into small steps, like the first thing you want
to do the first night when you get home
is go out in the garage and look at
which pieces of artwork you want to put to
take pictures of. Then you get your camera, you
get your film, you take the pictures. Within about
2 or 3 weeks, he had his portfolio put
together. He was sending it around. And another young
woman that I worked with, uh, uh, just under
30s who had, uh, a victim of a, of
a traumatic sexual, uh, uh, event in her teens,
uh, who came to believe as a consequence that
she was unlovable, that no decent person would, that
she was interested in would ever be interested in
her. Uh, AND unfortunately what she then developed was
a strategy where she would, uh, manipulate, uh, wheedle,
uh, lie, etc. She wouldn't be herself in relationships,
and that was what drove her partners away. It
wasn't, she had a whole series now of relationships
where she tore, tore the partner up. It wasn't
because of anything I love about her, but the
behavior she engaged in were problematic. Uh, FOR her,
one of the key issues was to help her,
uh, feel comfortable enough to with her current romantic
partner, let him know what happened to her and
see if he ran out of the room screaming.
He didn't. Uh, IT turns out nobody else was
concerned about that as, as she was, and she
was able then to drop some of those, uh,
protective strategies. Um, BOTH of those were people that
had been depressed longer than typical in the episodes,
and they had gotten stuck believing things about themselves
that simply weren't true. Uh, IT meant running some
experiments. The first, uh, the sculptor's case wasn't anything
that scary about doing it, just had to help
them pass. The, uh, uh, behavioral uh inhibition initiation.
For the second lady, it was like terrifying. It's
like telling somebody who's afraid they're going to jump
off a bridge and they can run across the
road, across the bridge, and they're not going to
jump. So she had, she had run tested out
herself that, uh, took a couple of months to
get her to the point of doing that. But
by and large, I think, uh, you can flip
the, uh, uh, put the wheels on the other
side for cognitive theory. It's not that these folks
necessarily. Uh, GOT depressed because they believe inaccurate things
about themselves, but in the midst of being depressed,
thinking about a lot of different things, some of
which are inaccurate, that they get stuck, you want
to help them get past that point.
Mhm. So we talked about an evolutionary take or
an evolutionary perspective on depression. Do you think that
cognitive behavioral therapy can be combined with an evolutionary
perspective to help facilitate the evolved functions of depression
as you described earlier? Yeah,
yeah, yes, I, I, I think it can, although
we're still kind of feeling our way. To that,
and again, most of my colleagues who are cognitive
behaviorists wouldn't uh buy into that. They would necessarily
agree. Um, FOR example, uh, most people think of
suicide as a paradox. Why would somebody take their
own lives? Uh, AND I start talking with clients
about my goodness, uh, it's probably stamped into the
species. I'll talk about the, uh, uh, grandparents willing
to sacrifice for the offspring, etc. ETC. It doesn't
mean it's not a tragic, uh, tragic. WHEN it
happens, and there's no way in which you're taking
your own life is going to benefit other people
that care about you. We refer to suicide as
the gift that keeps on giving the the uh
uh people, the families, etc. ARE horribly uh affected
by an individual suicide, but it's not an aberration.
It's something that's baked in and it's probably a
mistake nowadays. It's probably something, if it ever served
a purpose, it was, uh, uh, in the past.
It's not likely to serve a purpose now, although,
Uh, we're more likely to run into a burning
building to save our children or grandchildren than we
are to save somebody else's children or grandchildren. So
again, it still affects what we do, but something
that helps normalize the experience and suggests a pathway
out of it is the, the way I think
the evolutionary perspective starts to help you out.
Mhm. OK, so that's about psychotherapy. How about medication?
I mean, what kind of medication do we have
available for depression? You've already talked a little bit
about that, but tell us more.
Yeah, well, again, I think for, if you've got
a, uh, uh, Bipolar I with psychotic mania or
depression, uh, I think lithium is a wonder drug,
and I think the guy that uh first brought
it, uh, uh, uncovered aca deserved the Nobel Prize
that I think he got. Uh, OF course, pharmaceutical
companies don't like it much because it's a natural
salt, inorganic salt, which means they can't get patents
on. So I don't make money on it, but
I think it's, I think it's a wonder drug.
And if I'm working with a client, which I've
done rarely, who, uh, meet criterion for, uh, uh,
bipolar one disorder, one of the main things I've
tried to encourage them to do is, for God's
sake, stay on the lithium. Don't, uh, don't come
off a little high so, um, the, uh, The,
uh, bipolar 2, nobody really quite knows how best
to treat and probably you'd do the same thing
you would for, uh, unipolar disorder. Although, again, if
it were me, I wouldn't want to lose the
energy. I wouldn't mind losing the occasional depressions, but
I wouldn't want to lose the energy, so I'd,
I'd buy into the, the hypomania. It's, uh, it's
more adaptive than not. For unipolar depression, by far
the garden variety version of things. Uh, MEDICATIONS we
mentioned earlier, you've got the older monoamine oxidase inhibitors
and the tricyclics, both pretty powerful, both pretty effective,
but each have a downside in terms of some
of the risks that they, they bring up. You
have the newer, uh, uh, SSRIs, the selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors like Prozac, etc. YOU'VE seen the TV
commercial, they got the, the, uh, the frowning face
that bounces along that turns into a smiley face
on Prozac. Uh, THESE medications do work most of
the time for most people. The downside. Uh, AGAIN,
from an, uh, an evolutionary biological perspective, the downside
is that, uh, what they be able to do,
uh, the, the conventional wisdom is that depression biologically
is related to a deficit of serotonin, uh, in
the brain. Uh, AND so you're trying to raise
the serotonin levels. The older medications, MAOIs, tricyclics, um,
and the newer SSRI's all increase the amount of
serotonin in the synapse, so they'll, uh, they'll have
that effect, and the general perception is that's why
they work. Turns out they do that, but they
do that only, uh, they, they do that for
only for the first couple of weeks. And what
then happens is it turns out there's not a
deficit of serotonin, there's an excess, and what you're
doing is driving an excess in the serotonin level
so high that the underlying homeostatic regulatory mechanisms kick
in and shut the system down. They suppress synthesis
of serotonin pre-synaptically. They block sensitivity post-synaptically. So in
effect, It's like you're tricking the nervous system to
do something that it wasn't designed to do in
a way that's gonna, may well, we don't know,
but may well stay locked down as long as
you stay on medications. The risk there is we
know that the likelihood of the symptoms coming back.
Uh, IF you stop medications, it's about 3 times
higher, uh, uh, within the first, uh, uh, couple
of months as it later on. We don't know
exactly why that is, or at least we believe
that's so we don't actually know if that's fully
true and it may well be the case that
with the medications. We're stopped, we're suppressing the symptoms,
but we're keeping the episode going. So individuals stay
in episode for as long as they stay on
medications and they're at elevated risk when they come
off. Uh, MY evolutionary biological colleague Paul Andrews, uh,
did a very elegant, uh, look at meta-analysis, uh,
uh, back in the uh uh teens where he
predicted that the extent to which any given medication
class suppressed the underlying uh. Suppress the underlying uh
uh uh uh perturb the underlying neurotransmitter systems would
predict how likely you were to relapse when you
came off, and it turns out the, the data
exactly conformed to that. If you get better on
a pill placebo, it's about 20% that you're going
to relapse after you stop. If you get better
on an SSRI, it goes up to about 40%.
Better on a tricyclic, which is both serotonin and
norepinephrine, goes up to 50%. Get better on MAOI,
which is norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine, it goes up
to about 75%. That's a pretty elegant, uh, confirmation
of a theory based on evolutionary biological notions. So
the concern I would have for medications is, uh,
uh, you pay me now, you pay me later,
uh, they're going to suppress symptoms while you stay
on, although. There's uh some uh evidence of what's
called tachyphylaxis where you can break through for at
least some individuals and become symptomatic again anyway. You
may end up uh getting your clinical benefits because
you're tricking the underlying nervous system of the brain
in a way that is not natural for the
brain.
Right, um, are there any, at least in the
long term, I mean, if you use antidepressants long
term, are there any side effects, any common side
effects that you think people should be aware of,
because sometimes I hear people complaining about, for example,
sexual dysfunction or the fact that it's easier now
for them to put on weight and things like
that. I mean, is that true?
Well, it depends on the medication. And, and, uh,
uh, for example, with the, uh, very common, uh,
SSRI's, uh, one of the major side effects, uh,
is, is, uh, sexual loss of interest in sexuality.
Uh, WOMEN don't seem to mind, men seem to
mind a lot, and in our clinical trials, if
we're going to use SSRI as a compare one
of the SSRI's as a comparator, we almost always,
any, any male that access the internet would be
worried about that. We'd have to also, uh, provide
them with Viagra, uh, to, to carry things out.
Um, THE, uh, Women can still function, men can't.
It, it's a problem. Uh, Most of the serotonin
in the body isn't in the brain, it's in
the gut, and it regulates, uh, uh, uh, digestion,
sexual interest as well. Uh, SO, uh, the side
effects for the newer SSRIs are relatively minor, uh,
if you consider loss of interest in sex relatively
minor, consider some indigestion relatively minor, but you won't
die as a consequence of taking the medications.
Mhm. Uh, AND so, I mean, at the end
of the day, what do we know in terms
of treatment? What is better? Is it psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy,
or a combination of
both? Yeah, uh, again, we, we're kind of inching
away to better understanding of how that works. In
general, again, for bipolar disorder, bipolar one, I would
start with medications and think of psych. Therapy is
adjunctive. Uh, FOR unipolar disorder, non-psychotic unipolar disorder, uh,
you can pick them and choose medications or, or
psychotherapies. Uh, IT is probably the case that the
combination works a little better than either one alone,
um, and I would have, uh, uh, I would
have said that, uh, 1015 years ago, maybe 2015,
20% increment in terms of the acute response, uh.
But our most recent trial that I've done with
colleagues suggests that if something like cognitive therapy has
an enduring effect that cuts risk in the future,
uh, doing it, uh, getting cognitive therapy in combination
with medications cuts that out and uh eliminates that,
and there's some you, you can begin to make
a case for that might be if you understand
the animal literature and, and the way the medications
work. So, um. 1520 years ago, I would have
said they can start on uh uh any of
the psychotherapy, well, you can start on cognitive therapy
or behavioral activation or uh interpersonal psychotherapy or you
can start on medications, pick them and choose them,
uh, or the combination. I would say, I wouldn't
start the combination. I would start somebody on one
of the, uh, empirically tested, known to be effective
psychological interventions of cognitive. Uh, THERAPY, and behavioral activation,
interpersonal psychotherapy, and only bring medications in if somebody
isn't better within about 8 to 10, 8 to
10 to 12 weeks. Um, YOU can, you get
a pretty, if somebody's going to respond, usually that
happens pretty rapidly. And if that isn't happening, that
that may be an individual that might benefit. There
also are some, uh, there's also a reason to
think that different people are just going to respond
to different things. We're not sure about that, but
the evidence is, is tipping in that direction. Very
recent study out of Emory in Atlanta, uh, Bodie
Dunlap and Helen Mayberg and Ed Craighead and others
that uh People that didn't respond to cognitive therapy
got switched over to medications. People that didn't respond
to medications got switched over to cognitive therapy or
the combination, and they did better among the non-responders.
So in depression, if the first thing doesn't work
over a reasonable period of time, either switch to
something else or add something else, and I think
that would hold us true from the medications. If
I had my druthers, I would rather be over
depression than. Than not, and even if that wiped
out a long-term enduring effect, better to not be
depressed than to be depressed. Although if I had
my choice, I would choose something that would uh
either cut the risk for future depressions, which cognitive
behavioral interventions look like they do, or improve the
quality of my relationships, which looks like interpersonal psychotherapy
does.
Um, I mean, are, are there instances where someone,
a patient might be, might be suffering from depression
that is so severe that before they start psychotherapy,
they have to be put on medication because maybe
they won't even speak or something like that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that, that does happen. Um, YEAH,
that's, uh, relatively rare within the, uh, uh, about
15, 6, 16% of the population that the epidemiological
studies, uh, meet criteria for major depression, about, uh,
uh, 10% of them might be so severe, we
consider that almost a psychotic level of depression. They're
probably going to get hospitalized at least initially to
get things stabilized. And, uh, very often that you're
going to start with either medications. The single most
effective thing, uh, for the treatment of very severe
depression is electroconvulsive therapy, ECT, and, uh, in the
old days they had a reputation for being barbaric
before we had the, uh, uh, muscle relaxants, people
would break spines, break bones in, in the midst
of the convulsions, uh, but that's pretty well handled,
and, uh. My goodness, if I had a severe
psychotic depression. Um, I wouldn't want to live in
Berkeley, where the city fathers once outlawed the use
of ECT. It's the fastest way to get back
on your feet. Uh, UNFORTUNATELY, like, uh, like medications,
if you stop doing the ECT, it, you can't
do that often, that, uh, that many of that
often. If you stop doing it, the depression will
tend to come back. So what most of my
psychiatric colleagues do is use ECT to get a
really, really severe recalcitrant depression under control and then
bring that, put medications on top or have other
psychotherapists come in down the line.
So let me ask you this because I've heard
this from some people and I'm not sure if
that kind of claim should be taken seriously, scientifically.
I mean, uh, is there any evidence that nowadays
in the more developed industrialized society. The, uh, societies,
there's an overdiagnosis of depression or, and, or an
overprescription of antidepressant drugs.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Again, this is, this is
where my biases might show and where my good
psychiatric colleagues might strongly disagree. I think more people
are on medications than need to be. I think
more people are kept on medications longer than need
to be, uh, particularly since you have alternatives, uh,
uh, psychological alternatives that don't have the, the medication
downside. So I think er I think clearly the,
the old prescription is going on. I'll also say
that, uh, uh, uh, general practitioners are absolutely marvelous
people. They have Worry about about 80 things every
time you go to see them every year, 40
of which will kill you, and depression's not one
of those. So if they do have a client,
a patient that mentions being depressed or anxious, it's
very reasonable for them to prescribe an SSRI. What
they don't know how to do are the psychological
interventions. So if most, most folks have a primary
care physician, uh, most folks don't have a psychotherapist
or psychiatrist. So if you're going to get treated
for depression and or anxiety, it's, it's probably going
to be a medication and uh. Um, NO great
downside, uh, in the, in the short term. If
there's a downside, it's in the long term, uh,
but it's not grotesque. The older anti-anxiety medications, the,
uh, minor tranquilizers, lithium, uh, uh, librium, Valium, etc.
uh, WERE about as effective as, uh, alcohol and
every bit as addictive. So, uh, we, it's better
to have SSRI's than virtually any other thing we
have for non-psychotic disorders, but again, I think the
psychotherapies work at least as well or better.
Great. So I have one last question then. I
mean, when is it exactly that depression ends and
how does it end? I mean, are, is, is
there any specific point at which uh doctors or
clinical psychologists say, OK, so this person is cured
of depression.
Yeah, no, there, there's no clear-cut boundary other than
the symptoms are largely resolved. And, uh, um, they,
uh, I've always been pretty open. I had at
least 3 major episodes in my early twenties and,
uh, in almost every case, I could, I could
point to the time, the day, the night and
the event when it went away. It just like
it disappeared, like it cleared. But for other people,
sometimes it's much more gradual phenomenon, so there's no
clear demarcation. It's when the symptoms are largely resolved
and, uh, and, uh, have gone away, you're back
and doing things you would typically do, uh, that's
a pretty good indication the depression's lifted.
Mhm. Great. So, Doctor Holland, uh, just before we
go, where can people find your work on the
internet?
Oh my, my goodness. Um, IF you go to,
uh, uh, I have a website at Vanderbilt, uh,
that some of my things will be on. If
you go to Google Scholar, that'll list, a list
of publications and usually there they'll have a, a,
a link that lets you get right to the
article. Uh, SHOUT out again to my, uh, uh,
colleague, the evolutionary biologist Paul Andrews, who's really, uh,
turned my own thinking, uh, around in the last
1015 years, and I would take a look at
his stuff as well, especially his stuff.
Great. I will be leaving links to that in
the description of the interview and, and thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been a fascinating conversation.
Pleasure, pleasure, and I just say, uh, uh, if
you're looking for future, uh, interviewees, Andrews. Be terrific.
Uh, Daisy Single at the University of Toronto, who
is a rising star in global mental health would
be terrific. Vikram Patel, who's, uh, Daisy's, uh, uh,
mentor at Harvard, would be terrific. So there, there's
some really interesting people out there that are changing
the way we think about things.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel Pan
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank,
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.